---
title: Announcing Jupyter Book 2 alpha
subtitle: Rebuilt from the ground up for prettier PDFs, richer websites, and better tooling.
date: 2024-11-11
authors:
  - name: Angus Hollands
    orcid: 0000-0003-0788-3814
    affiliations:
      - Jupyter Book
abbreviations:
  CLI: command-line interface
license: CC-BY-4.0
---

Over the last ten months, the Jupyter Book team have been hard at work; Jupyter Book has [become a Jupyter subproject](https://github.com/jupyter/governance/pull/229), and the team[^jb-eb] announced a [plan to release Jupyter Book 2][plan]. This post announces the **alpha release of Jupyter Book 2.0**, which has been re-written from the ground up to use the new MyST-MD engine.

Over the next few months, we will work in preparation for the full release of Jupyter Book 2. Stay tuned for more!

## New Features in `2.0 alpha`
### Rich Hover Previews
Try hovering over [this tooltip about tooltips!](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tooltip). The new MyST book and article themes provide useful hover previews for links to other MyST content, Wikipedia, GitHub issues, and many more.

### Share & Embed Content
Content from other websites built with the MyST engine can be embedded in your own sites and PDFs:
% TODO: embed example

### Simple Instant Search
A new client-side search uses a simple, modern algorithm for fast _local_ search that finds the results that you care about.

% TODO: embed GIF / video

### High Quality PDFs

PDF documents can now be built with Typst, a high-quality typesetting engine that produces readable error messages and beautiful documents.

## Coming Soon in `2.0.0b0`

### Custom Styles & Scrips

Jupyter Book 2 will make it easy to tweak your website styles, and add new website behaviors.

### Generate Markdown from Code Cells

The MyST engine is on-track to support the inclusion of references and other markup features generated by code cells.

### Control Cell Visibility with Tags

In the beta release, Jupyter Book 2 will once-again be able to show and hide content according to cell tags.

## Jupyter Book 2 vs MyST-MD

% TODO testimonial from JB 1->2 users

At this early stage, the new Jupyter Book application `jb` behaves identically to the `mystmd` engine that it is built upon; as outlined in [our Jupyter Book 2 plan][plan], we intend for Jupyter Book to be an "opinionated distribution" of `mystmd` whereby the same configuration format and CLI. This contrasts with Jupyter Book 1, which was built on top of the Sphinx documentation engine, but offered its own CLI and configuration files. In future, the `jb` and `mystmd` CLIs may diverge from one another, but we expect that this will be handled in a graceful manner: `mystmd` commands should always be compatible with the `jb` application. 

[plan]: https://executablebooks.org/en/latest/blog/2024-05-20-jupyter-book-myst/
[^jb-eb]: Jupyter Book project has historically been a _technical_ project of the Executable Books organisation. In 2024, the establishment of a Jupyter subproject means that the Jupyter Book project now has its own identity outside of Executable Books.

